Good day I'm Norman Wildberger there are serious
problems with the current theory of real numbers
and we are trying to lay out what these are
in various contexts we've already had a look
at real numbers as infinite decimals and the
various problems associated with that point
of view today we're going to look at another way
of approaching real numbers which is through the
idea of a Cauchy sequence of rational numbers this
is one of a number of different ways there's also
the approach of Dedekind cuts there's also an
approach of continued fractions there's another
way of approaching real numbers through axiomatic
we're going to try to show that none of these
really work they all have serious and logical
difficulties today we're to start looking at
this issue here which is a very big topic because
it involves concepts which we haven't talked about
before in this course on foundational mathematics
so it's going to be necessary for me to introduce
various ideas from modern analysis in order to
be able to critique this particular approach to
real numbers it's probably fair to say that this
is the definition of choice for most analysts a
real number is a an equivalence class of Cauchy
sequences of rational numbers so today's lecture
we're going to start moving towards understanding
what this means we'd have an initial look at
sequences limits Koshi sequences rather in an
informal way to begin with to give you a sense
of what these things mean I'm going to need to
take care that we don't assume that we know what
these words mean already each of these words is
going to have to be looked at very closely and
carefully with the definition of sequences the
various problems are very parallel to problems
with functions so you might like to have another
look at math foundations 42 to remind yourself
of some of those difficulties we are tackling
the idea of trying to describe the continuum a
line starting with a rational number line and
then trying to see whether we can augment that
to get real numbers the discussion is a little
bit hard to visualize sometimes because of the
small nature of the line the fact that it's rather
constricted it turns out that a lot of the ideas
can be more easily explained in a two dimensional
setting rather than in a one-dimensional setting
which is a bit ironic because the two dimensional
setting is perhaps more complicated but we can at
least visualize things and some things become
clearer so I'm going to try to give you some
introductory ideas in the planar context we're
going to look at sequences of points in the plane
and here are a couple of different sequences
illustrating different things that sequences
can do here's a sequence of points s1 s2 s3 s4
s5 s6 s7 and they seem to be marching roughly in
that direction that more or less a uniform pace
here's another sequence u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 u 6 u 7
which is also going in that direction and seems to
be getting closer and closer to the S sequence so
these two sequences are getting closer and closer
together as we carry on we might say that the two
sequences are converging towards each other this
is not in fact such a standard terminology in pure
mathematics but it is very common English usage
of the term when two paths come together we say
they converge here's another sequence the t's
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 and prepped carry on
this sequence seems to be spiraling around and it
looks like there's some kind of movement towards
a final point which is perhaps somewhere in here
so this looks like a sequence that maybe has a
limit here's a sequence R 1 R 2 R 3 R 4 R 5 r 6
r7 r8 that just goes around and around these four
points there's clearly no limit there is certainly
a very clear pattern just going around and around
and around and here is a very simple sequence
V 1 V 2 V 3 V 4 it's a constant sequence where
every point is exactly the same one you think
of just a bunch of blipping points always in
the same spot well here you have blipping points
moving around so these are examples of different
kinds of behavior of sequences that can happen
in the plane of course there could also be a
very random kind of sequence a sequence which just
pops around rather randomly that's also possible
but we're going to be thinking more in terms
of sequences which converge either to another
sequence like this or perhaps converging to what
looks like some kind of limiting point so this
main idea for a definition of real numbers that
we're trying to understand is this one here that
a real number is by definition an equivalence
class of Cauchy sequences of rational numbers
so we'd like to understand what that means or at
least what mathematicians would like it to mean
it's rather a complicated story as it turns out
it's rather a sophisticated notion there's a lot
of different ingredients there and a lot of them
are problematic require quite a lot of preparation
so both the notion of an equivalence class and the
notion of a Cosi sequence of rational numbers have
to be understood so they try to get some initial
sense of what this means I'm going to stick with
a two-dimensional story and I'm going to give you
a two dimensional analog let's consider over here
the situation where we have a particular point
the point 1 1 in the plane it's got a rational
coordinates 1/1 rate there it is now we can
imagine sequences that move towards that point
for example here is a sequence of blue points
which is moving steadily towards that red point
here is a sequence of black points moving towards
it and here's a sequence of green ones a little
bit more erratic still eventually moving towards
the red point so each of these three sequences
is moving towards or converging to this point in
fact they're also converging to each other as they
move closer to this point they are also getting
closer to each other at the same time that's an
important observation so here we have actually
three converging sequences three sequences they're
all getting closer to each other and they also
happen to be getting closer and closer to this
rational point 1 1 now let's look at a situation
over here where we know there is no rational point
let's look at the circle x squared plus y squared
equals 1 and the line y equals x and we've talked
already about where these two meet the line and
the circle in fact don't meet there is no rational
point where they meet even though it certainly
looks like they do in order for a point to exist
it would have to have the form 1 over root 2
1 over root 2 we've already talked about the
problematic aspect of root 2 this is a fictitious
kind of object it doesn't really exist there is no
point err the line and the circle meet okay but
the analyst will say all right there may not be
a point yet but we can create such a point we can
construct such a point sort of filling in the gap
that seems to be obviously there and here is the
beginnings of this idea what we do is we consider
sequences that are moving towards this imaginary
non-existent point so here's a sequence of green
points moving in the general direction of where
the circle and the line seem to meet here the
sequence of blue ones here's a sequence of black
ones and all three sequences are converging to
each other they are getting closer and closer
together to each other as they move in this
direction so there's no point that actually
they are limiting - it's quite different from
this situation here but nevertheless we have these
three sequences that I'm getting closer and closer
together so in both cases all three sequences are
converging so the idea and it's rather a very nice
and elegant idea is to say alright let's try to
augment our plane by introducing a new point and
what this new point is going to be is going
to be well it's going to be these sequences
the sequences themselves we're going to consider
as a kind of an object as long as the sequences
have the property that they're getting closer
and closer together in a certain way like these
ones are the idea is to replace the non-existent
point there with this family of sequences which
are moving toward what that imaginary point
might be it's an interesting idea the question
is can we make it work or not so let's have a
look what it looks like sort of on paper this
idea so the idea is we've got this fictitious
point P there that we're trying to define we're
trying to bring it into existence and the idea
is that we're going to group all the sequences
which converge together towards this mysterious
non-existent point P and we're going to define P
as that set of converging together sequences so
for example if this particular sequence is say
the sequence s 1 s 2 s 3 and this one here is T
1 T 2 T 3 the blue ones and the black ones are V
1 V 2 V 3 and so on and here's another one u 1
u 2 u 3 u 4 the red ones coming together like
this all of these four sequences have a property
that they're getting closer and closer together
they're converging to each other and they also
happen to be getting closer and closer to where
we think this point ought to be so the idea is
we're going to define this point P to be the
collection of such sequences so it's going to be
a set and it's going to have various objects in it
the objects are themselves sequences there's the
S sequence there's a u sequence the T sequence
the V sequence and then there will be a lot of
other sequences to basically any sequence that
we can draw on the plane that eventually starts
heading towards this region or actually ends up
heading towards exactly the same place that these
sequences are heading towards whatever that means
okay so this is a two-dimensional picture a
real number is going to be a one-dimensional
version of this we're going to do the same thing
or try to do the same thing on a one-dimensional
line that's a little bit harder visualize because
there's not so much room here I think it's easier
to see what the basic idea is all right so this is
a very interesting idea can we define new numbers
of this kind certainly you can see this is going
to be a lot more complicated than with rational
numbers okay with a rational number you just
have a single rational number like 3 over 7 or
1249 over 3 million 478 the numbers can be big but
there's still only two of them one on top of the
other here we have well it turns out an infinite
number of sequences and as we'll see shortly in a
few videos the the size of this infinity whatever
that means is even larger than you might think it
ought to be and each of these elements in turn is
itself an infinite sequence so we have an infinite
set of infinite sequences and these sequences are
all related in some way that they somehow converge
in the same general way to each other it's a very
complicated object a single real number is going
to be a major complicated thing and you can see
why in treatments of first year calculus or even
second or third year analysis at the university
level people are reluctant to go into a lot of
detail as to how this exactly works it's going
to be clear that at the very minimum it's going
to be very complicated a lot of work is going to
have to be done we're going to be challenged to
set up a complete theory of arithmetic with
the fundamental objects being so complicated
and I claim that in fact doesn't work ok that it's
a mirage that is something that is good perhaps
in principle but when you actually look at the
details the details don't stack up the thing does
not fit together in a proper mathematical format
that's my claim we're going to look at this in
much greater detail then is traditionally done
almost anywhere else so in the next few videos
we're going to have a very very good look at this
idea you're going to learn real numbers probably
better than you do in any other place so with this
initial orientation to what a real number might be
I think you can appreciate that there are going
to be some serious challenges at the very least
we are going to have to deal with these issues
we're going to have to understand what we mean
by a proper definition of infinite sequence of
rational numbers it's clear enough what a finite
sequence of rational numbers is we are going to
have to have a very clear understanding of what we
mean by an infinite sequence of rational numbers
and when we look carefully at that we're going to
see that this fundamental divide between infinite
choice and computable that played a major role in
our discussion for infinite decimals is going
to raise its head here also we're going to need
an appropriate notion of converging together
sequences what does it mean for two sequences
to kind of be converging together in the way
we want them to be so that there's some kind
of limiting point that we can create from the
sequences and that's not so easy but the great
French mathematician Koshi outlined the basic idea
there so there's a notion of Cauchy sequences that
we're going to have to understand that's going
to be the main tool to to get on to that aspect
of things we're going to need a prior theory
of infinite sets because we're defining this
real number as an infinite set of sequences
so we have to know what an infinite set is
that we like it or not we better have a theory of
infinite sets this is a major problematic business
that cannot be avoided if you want to go down
this route cannot be avoided in fact we're also
going to have to consider not just so-called
countable infinite sets but also uncountable
infinite sets and you might as well know that as
far as I'm concerned there are no infinite sets
at all countable or uncountable they're all just
fairytale objects and then of course we're going
to have to define an arithmetic with these objects
once we've defined the real number as well then we
have to say how we're going to do the operations
and we're going to have to try to prove the laws
of arithmetic that turns out to be not as painful
as you might think there's some issues but it's
not overwhelmingly difficult it turns out to be
a little bit easier to define the arithmetic with
these Cosi sequences than it does with infinite
decimals so this is a trade-off that we get when
we look at these different ways of approaching
real numbers in some of the methods one kind of
issue is more problematic and another method
another kind of issue is more problematic but
unfortunately there's always something that's
problematic in all of these approaches I want
to give you just a bit of an idea of what this
Kochi sequence idea is it's very critical aspect
of this approach and to make that a little bit
easier in today's lecture we're just going to
assume we already know what infinite sequence is
we're just going to draw pictures and not be too
precise and we are going to work as I've said
in the plane rather than the line because it's
easier to visualize and the the main thing
that we need in the plane is the idea that
if we have two points we can measure how far
apart they are and the way we measure how far
apart they are is not be a distance please it's
not instance it's via quadrants so at the point
a one with coordinates x-one y-one a two with x2
y2 the quadrants is the sum of the square of the
difference of the x coordinates plus the square
of the difference of the Y coordinates there's
no need for a square root that's how we're going
to measure the separation between two points and
if quadrants is a little bit unfamiliar to you
have a look at say the math foundation lecture
number 25 or you can look at the entire wild trig
series which is all about quadrants as a basic
notion for doing geometry so this comes down
to two different approaches to the convergence
of two sequences here are two different pictures
here is a pair of sequences and these sequences
are converging R 1 s 1 R 2 s 2 R 3 s 3 and as
we're moving along well we're heading in that
direction but the quadrants between corresponding
points is getting smaller and smaller as we move
along so we can say that the sequences s 1 s
2 s 3 and R 1 R 2 R 3 converge precisely when
the quadrants between the K element of s and
the K element of R goes to 0 as K increases
admittedly this is a little bit loose we need
to clarify exactly what this means but I think
you can have an intuitive understanding as K gets
bigger in other words as we're moving through the
sequence the quadrants between the corresponding
elements gets smaller and smaller and smaller
closer and closer to 0 so that's a definition of
what it means for two sequences to converge that
however is not the kind of convergence that's
needed for the real number definition for the
real number definition we need a tighter form of
convergence a more stringent form of convergence
this is the Koshi notion of convergence let's
illustrate it over here in this picture so here
we have a sequence s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 and as we're
carrying on the values of the sequence are
slowing down and they're getting closer and closer
together to each other they look like they might
be approaching something but we're not sure here's
another sequence R 1 R 2 R 3 R 4 R 5 and so on and
it looks like they're also ultimately slowing down
and moving towards something perhaps so these two
sequences also converge in this sense so if we
looked at the quadrants is between corresponding
elements in the sequences say s6 and rs6 that
separation and that s7 are 7 s8 r 8 we'd notice
that those quadrants are also getting closer
to 0 so these two sequences converge in this
sense but and here is the important point they
converge in a stronger sense than just that they
converge in this kosice sense which is that the
quadrants is between SK and RL go to 0 as K and
L increase in other words it's not just pairing
sk with RK where the indices are the same we're
comparing an arbitrary element in the s sequence
with an arbitrary element in the our sequence and
as long as the indices are sufficiently big then
the two points are close so here for example if K
and L are both big but not necessarily equal for
example K could be a thousand and L might be 3000
then still if we look at s a thousand wherever it
is and our sub 3000 those two points are going to
be very close together the quadrants between them
is going to be close to zero so this is the Koshi
notion of convergence it doesn't apply over here
these two sequences do not converge in the cosy
sense because well if they keep on doing like
this taking sort of equal steps like this then
we cannot expect for example S sub thousand and
R sub 3,000 to be close to each other they're not
going to be close to each other yes s a thousand
is going to be close to our a thousand but it's
not going to be close to our thousand and one some
dramatic difference between these two sequences
and these two sequences and so the analyst says
when we want to define real numbers as equal
those classes of sequences we've got to be working
with this Koshi notion of convergence so that's
a very important idea in modern analysis in fact
very important idea unfortunately the reality is
that trying to set up a theory of real numbers
as equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences of
rational numbers is very very difficult and
it's fraught with logical complications and
in fact it's rarely attempted in its entirety so
what happens is that students are told about this
and they might be told a few things about it and
maybe even a few things are proven but in terms
of having a systematic complete layout of this
theory it's almost never done it requires more
than just a few days effort and when you look
at it closely as we'll see well the homes are
quite significant so something to keep in mind
here with this discussion it's very easy for
us to get confused and very easy for us to start
crossing over from mathematics into philosophy I'm
not really interested in in philosophy in terms
of mathematics I would like to remove philosophy
from mathematics and I think one way of orienting
ourselves in this direction is to concentrate on
explicit examples and concrete computations
these are two things that can anchor us to
reality so if we have some complicated theory and
we're not quite sure do we understand this theory
or not we look for explicit examples we try to
make sure that the examples actually correspond
to the definitions so we match up the examples
with the definitions and we try to make concrete
computations we say let's put this into practice
and see what happens so in our next video we're
going to move towards a more careful understanding
of these various issues and a good place to start
is by looking at the structure of the rational
numbers the rational numbers are the framework
in which we are working and trying to set up
these real numbers the rationals are much more
complicated than people think they have a very
deep structure in fact and it's a very good idea
to understand a little bit that deep structure
of the rational numbers so we'd have an initial
look at that next time I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening